Our syllabus and material is not the same as conventional computer introductions. Where we have found something good in conventional teaching, we have used it. But very often I have serious objections to the way computing is taught, especially in my home country. As we have progressed in devising these courses, several aims have emerged,

~ Computers are places of utility and education
: Most courses claim this, but their teaching says otherwide.
~ Non-linear learning
: Computer usage is not linear, and niether is our teaching. If you want step-by-step instructions, do not do this course.
~ Inclusive learning
: This course is open for everyone, and many of our materials are built from work by those who do the courses. At several points, we disregard practice and structure we see as non-inclusive.
~ Cross platform
: There are many kinds of computers, and we teach for all. Our material will work for servers, mobiles, tablets, desktops, even commandline usage. Our material disregards operating systems and individual programs/apps.
~ Self-actuated learning
: All good computer people teach themselves using the work of others, and so do our students.

For learning,
~ We do not use repetition for learning
: It is bias towards those with learning skills. Some people from certain backgrounds, especially those from Asian and Far Eastern backgrounds, have these abilities, but we do not assume. 
~ We ocassionally use graded exercises
: Our way

This means,
~ Anyone can learn
: The courses have taught more women than men, more people from minorities than than majorities. They have also taught non-native speakers, older people, and some so-called ''learning disabled'.
~ The course is hard work
: Of a kind---it is like learning a language. Because we stress self-actuated learning, you must do a lot for yourself (many of our students want to)
~ We are not afraid of dropouts
: Unlike most courses. Some people are told to use a computer, and have too much in their life to learn.
~ Our students may have no certificate, but they can use a computer
: They can adapt to new programs, do simple fixes, and know where and how to ask for help. All fail-points for traditional computing courses.


